---
title: "Bernie Is Not an Organizer"
date: 2020-02-13T22:36:53-05:00
category: writing
description: "I’ve struggled to make sense of the argument that Bernie will be the Organizer in Chief because I can’t find any evidence that’s doing the work of organizing."
---

_I’m going preface this by admitting that the candidate I support in the primaries is Elizabeth Warren. It’s also important for me to say that if Bernie is the candidate, I will be so excited to campaign for him and vote for him. Ok._

----------

In the past few months I’ve encountered an argument for Bernie that if he were elected president, it would represent a completely new model for the President. This argument, which is popular, but I think is best summarized by the In These Times piece “[What a Bernie Sanders Presidency would Look Like](https://inthesetimes.com/features/Bernie-Sanders-presidency-climate-mobilization.html)” argues that Bernie, unlike past presidents, would be an Organizer in Chief. And because he’s an organizer, he’d have a movement behind him that would be disruptive against the political status quo and allow him to pass the ambitious policy proposals he’s campaigning for.

Taken at face value, I love this argument. We absolutely need to rethink politics in America at the federal level because the Climate Crisis is not an issue that we get to negotiate or water-down. And since climate change will exacerbate every other injustice that is structurally embedded in America, we need a radical political shift that is capable of generating momentum that up until now has not existed in the liberal political sphere. I am ready to support any candidate who is generating this momentum.

But I’ve struggled to make sense of the argument that Bernie will be the Organizer in Chief because I can’t find any evidence that’s doing the work of organizing. And to be clear, this is not a job description that Presidents necessarily need to fill in order to succeed. Senator Sanders could become President and succeed wildly even if he weren’t the Organizer in Chief. So please don’t think of this as me arguing against his candidacy, just that I’m trying to make sense of the rhetoric his supporters present in favor of his candidacy.

The only way I know how to sort through this is to examine what I understand the role of an Organizer to be, and then compare that against what Bernie is doing. And yes, I will not bury this further in the essay, I believe that there is a candidate who is doing the work of being an Organizer and that candidate is Senator Elizabeth Warren. And just to be absolutely clear, I am not arguing against either candidate being President, but I am trying to use the facts I can find to sort out what each of them thinks the President is supposed to do, so that I can make an informed decision about my ongoing support for one or the other until a candidate is chosen. This will also help me figure out how to talk about them once one (oh god, please let it be one of them) becomes the Democratic Presidential candidate.

Organizing people, in the sense of trying to build collective movements for liberation or political progress, is incredibly difficult. People are incredibly messy, every has their own traumas and baggage and goals and desires. You can give 10 people the same scenario and they might navigate it 10 different ways and it might be very difficult to judge if any of them are incorrect, because everyone is going to be operating from their own history, context, personality, emotional capacity, and so on. Organizers deal with this every day, trying to listen to disparate concerns, build trust, and generate consensus and momentum around the collective goal. It’s hard work, and thousands of people are doing this around the US every day.

I am not an organizer, I want that to be clear up front. If the above paragraph misrepresents the work of organizing, the rest of this post kind of falls apart. But I built this description from watching friends and acquaintances who are organizers do their job and sort through the emotional toil it takes. I call that out because I’m trying to be honest about the limits of my experiential knowledge.

If I am right about what organizing is, then broadly speaking it seems like there’s three really critical aspects: 1) earning trust to build a coalition, 2) making everyone in the coalition feel heard and respected, and 3) the ability to generate momentum. I would include the ability to maintain momentum, but I can’t imagine how that’s possible if you aren’t succeeding at 1 and 2, and so generating momentum and maintaining momentum seem inextricable.

Bernie has the slogan “Not Me. Us.” which points very much towards having a coalition. But the thing that has stood out to me in the past few months of trying to learn more about his campaign and him as a person specifically, is I struggle to find instances where he doing the hard work of earning trust. The moment this jumped out at the most was in his own words when the New York Times editorial board interviewed him:


> Look, I don’t tolerate bullshit terribly well, and I come from a different background than a lot of other people who run the country. I’m not good at backslapping. I’m not good at pleasantries. If you have your birthday, I’m not going to call you up to congratulate you, so you’ll love me and you’ll write nice things about me. That’s not what I do. Never have. I take that as a little bit of a criticism, self-criticism. I have been amazed at how many people respond to, “Happy Birthday!” “Oh Bernie, thanks so much for calling.” It works. It’s just not my style. I try to stay focused on the important issues facing working families in this country, and I fight for them.

Ok, the man is not that good at emotional labor. That’s definitely not abnormal for white dudes, speaking as one. But organizers generally understand how to make people feel seen and why that work is important. In the case of Bernie though, this goes deeper, from my perspective. He’s not even doing the work of building coalitions politically. He announced his candidacy last year in February. In the 10 months following, [he endorsed only 2 candidates](https://ballotpedia.org/Endorsements_by_Bernie_Sanders): two District Attorney candidates running in fairly liberal districts. I can’t find any evidence that he’s working to win the senate in 2020 or supporting House candidates, even though whoever is President in 2021 will be unable to pass a single bill without a congressional majority.

You can understand why I’m skeptical that Bernie wants to be Organizer in Chief.

Elizabeth Warren, in contrast, is doing all of this work. She has [endorsed numerous candidates](https://twitter.com/search?lang=en&q=endorse%20(from%3Aewarren)&src=typed_query) across the US, for local and national campaigns. There are so many stories of politicians at local and national levels who won or lost their races and in the aftermath, received a call from Warren offering encouragement and support. I’ve found numerous stories of her reaching out to activists in various communities to listen and understand their expertise and concerns. Taken together with the fact that her campaign has involved multiple ways that people could interact with her directly—her so-called “selfie” lines that last for hours after a campaign event and also the way she has chosen to replace traditional phone-time where candidates pander to big-money donors with a phone-time involving her calling small-dollar donars—Warren seems to be much more involved in the work of actively building a coalition than anything I know of Bernie doing.

The second part of being an organizer, as I understand it, is listening to your coalition and involving them in your movement. And this too, I struggle to find evidence that Bernie is doing this work. In 2016 it took a couple high-profile protests at his campaign events to get him to listen to the Black Lives Matter movement, a movement that had been going strong for at least 2 years. And to his credit, his campaign is doing much better about recognizing the distinctly American injustices of structural racism against Black Americans. But it’s unclear to me how much his campaign is actively reaching out the many communities his plans would address. Even this [extremely good BuzzFeed profile](https://www.buzzfeednews.com/article/rubycramer/you-dont-know-bernie-sanders) finds him recognizing the power of people telling their own stories, but it’s unclear how this feeds back into the policies he’s campaigning on.

I think this stands starkly in contrast with Elizabeth Warren. In January she rolled out her campaign’s [policy plan for disability policy](https://www.nytimes.com/2020/01/10/us/politics/elizabeth-warren-disability-plan.html). There were no videos involving disabled people making a plea for how the plan would help them, which would feel like disability porn. Instead, she released it in her own words, and in conjunction with a number of disability activists. I follow many of them on Twitter, and so many of them relayed that they had been in conversation with her team for months, and that the plan reflected their input and their desires. To me, there is marked difference between people saying “I have been involved in the creation of this plan and I support it on these grounds” versus making a video for how horrible American Capitalism leaves them. Another thing I remember is when Warren was [endorsed by 100 prominent Black womxn](https://www.essence.com/news/politics/elizabeth-warren-black-activists-endorsement/), it was with the understanding that the endorsement involved an [accountability promise](https://www.blackwomxnfor.com/fullendorse) that Warren would uphold. These women committed not to endorsing Warren as a candidate, but Warren as a partner who they could hold accountable if she was not living up to the commitments she made to them.

If Bernie has done this, I genuinely want to know. These type of reciprocal, conditional agreements feel deeply important if a candidate is going to take on the mantle of being an organizer.

----------

The final part of organizing from my perspective is building momentum, and here I absolutely recognize that Bernie has a ton of momentum and a large movement behind him. But per the above analysis, I’m not convinced his momentum is because he’s an Organizer, rather I think it’s because he’s a Visionary. This, let me once again be clear, is not an argument against Bernie, it’s an attempt to sort through the rhetoric around him. Being a visionary is absolutely worthwhile in politics, it’s just distinctly different from being an organizer.

An organizer, just to recap, based on my understanding, is a person who is doing all the messy, emotionally difficult work of earning lots of people’s trust and then building structures that allow them to give feedback and be involved in the process of building consensus, a consensus that hopefully generates momentum towards the collective goal.

But politics does not limit progress to this model, in fact there are numerous instances in American history where men (all presidents have been male!) have not been organizers but have radically changed the path that the country is on. These men are people I would categorize as Visionaries; men who rise to power by offering the electorate a different story than the one that is currently holding power. Bernie Sanders fits within this model: after decades of our politics being held captive by debates between right-wing conservatives and neoliberals, Bernie is offering a distinctly Marxist analysis of America, and is finding deep resonance amongst a broad swath of the country.

I just… I don’t think that Bernie is organizing a movement, or that he will become President and serve as Organizer in Chief. Instead, based on all evidence I can find, he’s telling a new-to-presidential-campaigning story about why most everyone in America is hurting and struggling, and he’s finding that the electorate is receptive to his analysis. This analysis, his narrative, is the thing that is inspiring the movement. He’s got a lot of plans on his website that derive from this narrative, and at his rallies he is able to make a compelling case for how these plans will help the majority of America. But he personally is not an organizer. He’s asking people to trust his vision. And he has a team that believes in his narrative, and is working to help implement it.

This to me, is the biggest distinction between Warren and Bernie. Yes, he is a socialist, and I am too. Warren has said that she’s a capitalist to the bones. I am not. But the 2020 Presidential election in America is not the deciding factor for whether capitalism survives or not, as far as I can tell. No matter who wins the election in November, Congress still exists. And there is no expectation that a majority of the House and Senate will be socialist. So any candidate will be required to navigate the political realities of our government.

Bernie is presenting a visionary narrative that challenges the ways most Americans understand the system to work. He’s hoping that his story will rally enough people behind him that he can accomplish his ambitious plans. He’s working hard to energize people to make his plans a reality by presenting a clear story and building a team to get people on board.

Warren is presenting a narrative that is not quite as visionary, but works to grapple with the incredibly complex structural realities. She is also doing the work to build a broad coalition of people: connecting with as many people as she can; providing emotional and financial support to other candidates; and inviting people affected by the harms of the current system to inform her policies for changing the system. She’s also working hard to energize people to make her plans a reality.

Based on the evidence I can find, Warren is the organizer. Bernie is a visionary. If there’s evidence to the contrary I’d love to see it. But everything I can find points in these directions, and it makes me question the leftist narrative that only Bernie has “the movement” that will allow him to accomplish his plans. Bernie’s movement is invested in him as a candidate. Warren also have a movement, and as far as I can tell, that movement is not only invested in Warren, but invested in their ability to be participants in bringing into fruition the futures they want to live in.


----------

I don’t know the future, and I want to reiterate what I opened with; if Warren or Bernie are the Democratic Presidential candidate, I will be ecstatic.

But I’d like to expand a little bit on the last point I made. I cannot find the evidence that Bernie is an organizer, but I don’t think being a visionary is a bad thing. What I do think is a campaign based on vision creates more risk for failure.

Bernie, as far as I can tell, is inviting people to support him because if we all join together and vote him in as President, his analysis and our support will be the thing that allows us to build a more equal America. But I have not seen evidence that Americans at large are being asked to get involved with evolving Bernie’s plans, or that Bernie is building a coalition in the broader American political sphere, or that he even thinks that’s a worthwhile goal. And what I worry is that should he become President, he’s going to encounter the political realities of Congress and the fact that legislation requires votes, and he’s not going to have a lot of allies. I worry that the when he encounters this point shit will hit the fan. I worry that because people will have invested so much faith in him, and his ability to get things done, that any failure in passing legislation—even if congress is more to blame—will result in burnout and loss of momentum. And I think this is a valid fear, because his lack of coalition and trust-building now means people won’t feel personally invested.

I worry about this less with Warren, because her plans are trying to grapple with the political realities of America, and because she’s doing the work of organizing and getting people deeply invested in her plans. Warren is not pretending to be a visionary—despite her “I have a plan for that” motto—because she’s involving a broad coalition of people who would benefit from her plans in the crafting of the plans, not just the support of getting them passed. She working to earn the support of politicians at every level of American politics. She’s deeply invested, as far as I can tell, in building momentum that’s premised on coalition building and listening, and from where I stand, she’s banking on her momentum only being sustainable if she can uphold her commitments.

As far as I can tell, and I am not able to do this professionally or for a career, I am only doing this because I genuinely want to understand my choices in the Democratic primary, Elizabeth Warren is the candidate who is running as an organizer. Bernie Sanders is running as a visionary. And neither of these angles is inherently better or worse than the other, but I’m tired of being confused on this issue.

Thanks for reading, and no matter what, I think our future is worth fighting for, and can bring liberation to us all. LFG.

