---
title: "Tech for People, a Dream"
date: 2022-11-18T14:35:10-05:00
draft: true
category: writing
description: An 
---

As I watch the "hellsite" quickly run up to a cliff, unclear if the asshole in charge will be able to stop it before it falls off the edge, my thoughts turn to possibilities. I've been working in or adjacent to tech for coming on 15 years, and this whole ransacking of Twitter coinciding with many of the biggest tech companies (FB, Amazon, etc) laying off thousands of workers feels different than anything I've seen. I was not around for the 2000 era tech crash (I was in highschool) and I don't believe this is a crash. But something is changing, and I want to think about what might result from these changes.

The tech industry today is a hoary beast that looks quite different from each angle you might examine it. Prior to digital technology, scaling products was a physical task that involved immense amounts of material construction for factories and distribution, as well as human labor for building all the bits and bobbles. Think about cars (although really any decent sized consumer good could be used). To allow a million people to use a product might require producing a million units, which requires dozens if not hundreds of workers doing labor. Now that software is eating the world, product scaleability is not so closely linked to human capacity. A relatively few number of people can build a digital product that is used by millions of people. 

Digital technology has divorced scale from labor. Not completely, but definitely by orders of magnitude. [TKTK i need to talk about capital investments here]


and that's one of the reasons that people in the tech industry get paid a lot: the margins can be really good. It's easier to pay 10k people exorbitant salaries to create products when the potential customer base is global and the barriers to scale are mostly based on tech and attention rather than labor and materials. 

----

As a sidenote, this Dan Luu post is interesting because my argument isn't considered in the post? He examines a lot of arguments for why programmers are paid more and dismisses them all because they don't apply to similar fields. I read this article and I feel like he's missing the most obvious fact: relative to the scale and profit potential that digital products create, programmers can be "overpaid" relative to other industries while still over-delivering on profits and stock performance. This is a sociological argument for how capitalism works, I guess. All business people have ideas about what "labor" should cost as a portion of a business's operating expenses. These ideas have been developed over the past century and the majority of the informing data comes from business that build products out of physical materials rather than code. 

If my argument holds water, then the reason that programmers make a lot of money (especially at VC-funded businesses or the larger tech giants) is because the people with the money, who have expectations about what a business's costs should look like, do not yet believe that labor is too large of a portion of the expenses for tech companies relative to the investment returns they generate.

I'm thinking about all of this in light of the ongoing spectacle that is Elon Trying to Destroy $44b As Quickly As Possible because I think this saga shows how fragile this current world of lucrative tech employment actually is. 

Before this post delves into futures I can imagine, I want to insert a few more provocations. First, I think it's deeply important to always keep in mind that Ronald Reagan's presidency broke everything. It's a fun fact that on nearly every single chart that relates to the American economy, you can easily pinpoint when Reagan was president. The graphs all change! Every bit of American life that made it possible to live comfortably in the middle class was rolled back or undone starting in Reagan's administration. While there are so examples one could use here, what's salient for my thinking here is that the early 80's were when US Labor Unions started being destroyed, and because of that, wages were completely divorced from inflation and growth.

The country, as a single economic entity, has continued to grow richer since the 80's. But most Americans have not benefitted from that. There are tons of ways to make this argument, but for the sake of brevity, here's what I think is the best comparison. In 1980 the median household income was [$21,020](https://www.census.gov/library/publications/1982/demo/p60-132.html), in 2020 it was [$67,521](https://www.census.gov/library/publications/2021/demo/p60-273.html). If income had kept up with inflation alone, the 2020 comparable median income would have been $80,516 (according to the BLS inflation calculator). Notice I said inflation alone, there are of course plenty of other reasons for incomes to grow aside from keeping track of inflation. In the same time period the size and power of labor unions has diminished to [half of what it was in 1980](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Labor_unions_in_the_United_States#cite_note-BLS_2019_numbers-1). 

My reason for starting with all this data is that the futures I want to imagine are trying to make sense of these threads. I think they are important context for making sense of what the world looks like, as I attempt to capture what i hope is possible. with that in mind, here's the fun stuff.




----

Like many people who have invested time, attention, and content creation labor into Twitter, I am these days mourning its end. Sure, it has not fallen over yet, but Elon has approached his ownership of the company with the vision of Tobias Funke:"there's a new daddy in town. A discipline daddy." And exactly like Tobias, Elon Musk has the confidence and bluster of someone who lacks self-awareness of how much he doesn't know and lacks the curiosity to find out intentionally. Sadly for us, Elon's arrested development is not a sitcom. It's real life, and anyone who uses twitter is now the punchline to his foibles.

I've spent the past few months reflecting on what exactly Twitter means for me and more generally. This is born first, from my desire to capture fully what I'm mourning, but also because this is how I approach tech as a Product Manager. I want to understand what roles Twitter succeeded at so in the future I can intentionally weigh new platforms and communities against it. Twitter has some good impact, a lot of bad impact, and it's extremely hard to untangle the constituent parts generating these varied impacts. But there it has given me a lot of insight into what's possible; into what the internet can do. I feel like that's worth capturing. At the same time, there's a deeper layer to the Twitter saga that scales beyond social media itself, and speaks to the impact of Silicon Valley on our world. Elon's purchase and pursuant decimation of the company—callously laying off thousands of workers without even the pretension of regret or guiding purpose—is coinciding with the other famously large tech companies (Google, Meta, Amazon) are also laying off thousands of workers. Venture Capital is suddenly conservative as all the people who have profited from the past decade-plus of Silicon Valley growth suddenly realize their wealth and power might be fragile.

I think these threads—the good and bad value that Twitter created, the public spectacle of Elon's cataclysmic purchase of the company, and the rapid pivot that capital holders in tech (VC investments, public companies) are making from growth-at-all-expenses to "money is finite and we spend it responsibly" models—can be connected. Here's a blog to make my case. 

---

In 2008 I convinced the ad agency I was working for at the time to send me to the following year's SXSW. In advance of the conf I joined Twitter, and as I wandered around Austin I used Twitter to try and find where all the cool bloggers I enjoyed reading were hanging out. I was unsuccessful in finding any of those tech bloggers, instead I just kind of bounced around aimlessly, awestruck at the spectacle of corporations funding open bars and free concerts and throwing out swag. My first in-person experience with tech largesse was also my first time feeling like Twitter offered so much possibility for connection, even though I couldn't seem to realize that possibility. In the intervening 14 years, Twitter has proven this at scale. The platform suggests so much possibility, but not very much is actually realized. For me, I got a part-time internship at a startup I adored in 2014 (a few short months before it folded), which introduced me to some people I hugely admired. Their influence got me a full-time job at a media startup the following year when I was seeking salaried work. That job was the first to pay me six-figures (one dollar per year less in salary and I'd have been back to 5 figures, less I use ambiguity to inflate the imagination), and gave me the first time in life I knew my bills were fully covered by each paycheck.

I'm not the only one to connect career growth to twitter. Numerous people have used the platform to network, to find gigs and opportunities, or even to establish themselves as experts on a topic which itself can generate many types of opportunities. Some friends of mine recently got married, having fallen in crush with each other via Twitter and then finding that love carried over to the real world. 

One thing Twitter does better is give a global broadcast platform to people with no other social capital (meaning, you know, connections to wealth or traditional institutions of power). There are myriad examples of this but one person I think exemplifies it most is Tressie McMillan Cottom, who is (in my humble opinion) one of the smartest people writing publicly today. She's gone from a grad school blogger to author of multiple books, winning a MacArthur Genius Grant, and working as an New York Times OpEd writer, among many other accolades. Only she can say how influential Twitter has been in this, but from my "follower" perspective what's been massively important is the way she's worked in public, on the platform, thinking and questioning and working through ideas with her audience. She brilliantly uses Twitter for global broadcasting (as it is primarily designed for) while also maintaining a conversational, engaging vibe that invites her followers to constructively engage with the ideas she is working through (despite also being subject to the endless furor that is directed towards Black women who "dare" share their thoughts on the internet).

Dr. Cottom's generative conversational usage of the platform is impressive because having conversations on Twitter is really quite difficult! I think the founders of the company thought they were building a place for conversations but it truly isn't. This is direct a result of the affordances Twitter offers; you can reply and build a chain of replies, but things need to be linear. Responses that don't fit in a single tweet get lost, and the impulse is always to keep chains brief, due to this lack of ability to keep context as conversations meander. From the start, Twitter was a broadcast platform. If you have a public account, tweeting is literally broadcasting to the world. Anyone can follow you, retweet your tweets, fave it, reply to it, or quote tweet it. Those are the options! Aside from replying, all of these options are broadcast options. To follow is to subscribe for future thoughts. To retweet is to amplify, to say "this is something I want to share with those who follow me" for whatever reason. Quote tweets are the same, but with your thoughts on the shared tweet taking priority. Fave it, (well, ok this shows me as a long-time user, now of course it is a heart or like) is a small sign of positive acknowledgement. The platform is oriented around amplification and broadcasting.

Part of that broadcasting capability is how easy Twitter made it to post. Create an account, type in a text box, post! All organization happened in the tweet content (via tagging other users, using hashtags, or sharing links), there are no other real obstacles to sending your tweet. This meant that thousands of companies around the world have found that Twitter is actually the easiest way to share urgent communications. Recently I was on an international trip and hoped to take a Ferry from the Scottish island I was on; despite the ferry company having a full website with all sorts of information such as timetables and routes and ticket prices, they pointed me to a Twitter account they maintained as the place to get the most updated information on individual Ferry delays or cancellations. This is not an anomaly; Twitter has the least amount of friction for anyone trying to make a publicly accessible and easily updateable feed of information. 

One other way this broadcast orientation has manifested is in the portability of tweets. A tweet can be embedded nearly anywhere you can share text! News sites love to embed tweets, but you can past them into messaging apps, chat apps, all over the place and the content of the tweet (user, text/image content, date published) will be available. The constraints of Twitter (140 and then later 280 characters, 4 images or 1 video) has also ensured that a single tweet is easily to screenshot. If you can't embed the tweet, you can capture a photo of it and it'll be easily legible on all devices and shareable to any number of other social media sites. 

All of these features; the global broadcasting with a bunch of features that make it easy for individual users to amplify things they want to, along with the easy portability of tweets to places outside of Twitter.com can be seen a sort of first order system that has in turn generated numerous second order impacts.

